---
layout: single
title:  "3 Dishes for Each Meal!"
date:   2022-01-29 23:30:00 -0800
tags: food satire
categories: life
---

I look down at my bowl. Actually, a bowl and three plates. It's a nightmare.
Three different dishes for dinner. 3 unique vegetables, 2 unique protein
sources, and 1 carb source. I wonder what happened to me to become this...
monster.

There was a time in my life many years ago when my dinner would consist of a
pile of bacon with a pile of potatoes. It was simple. All the carbs I could eat
with all the protein I wanted. It would be quick to make too. Just a few minutes
of cooking and cleaning and then I would have a "complete" meal. Never mind the
many digestive and health issues that would cause. Just minor details! Details I
could live with in exchange for a simple bacon based meal.

So fine, I must now eat healthy. But not just healthy: also well arranged
thematic meals. I follow my natural instincts and create a spam and pepper dish.
This starts to feel vaguely Asian because of the spam, so I add some kimchi to
it because it's simple to pull from a jar. But now, I have a problem: one spicy
plate with a savory plate. So how do I combine it? Simple, I add a tomato and
egg over rice dish, with a little extra garlic to distinguish away from pure
sweet and savory with some sharpness. And a sprinkle of black pepper with the
eggs gave it a slight spicy kick so it can match the kimchi a little more.

So much effort. 3 distinct dishes with slight tweaks so that they all pair with
each other. Believe me, I have tried to go back to those simpler days of eating
piles simpler foods. But I just can't anymore. Every time I try, I notice small
tweaks to make all the dishes mesh slightly better. Fixing one tweak after tweak
finally results in a full complete meal. And now, there's no way to break this
compulsion.

Is this hell? Is this what it means to lose one's youth? Am I finally an adult?
I have no idea what it all means. All I know is, I have to chow down on this
before I grow hungrier.
