---
layout: single
title:  "As Much as I Love Firefly..."
date:   2022-03-11 10:00:00 -0800
tags: tv firefly sci-fi heritage culture
categories: life
---

I loved the show Firefly. I loved how the creators perfectly
blended the western genre with sci-fi to create a very unique sci-fi western. On top
of that, the dialogue is witty and memorable, and the actors all did a great job
bringing their characters to life. And the rest of the world probably agree. Despite
running for only one seasons, global fans were able to petition for a full feature
length movie to be released in theaters to finish the story. Recently, I was excited to
show it to my wife. I thought she would love it for the same reasons I did, but actually
she felt troubled by some of its portrayal - and I started to feel troubled as well.
Don't get me wrong, the parts I remembered were still just as good. But there's 5% of
the show that we both just had trouble getting past now. Mainly, the way it treats
Chinese culture and especially the language, was just too much.

Much has already been written about representation of Asian in Media, and particularly
Firefly's lack of representation. After all, the character Kaylee was originally
intended to be Asian, the Tam siblings have clear Chinese last names but zero Chinese
heritage shown in their background at all. And the use of Asian items in most scenes
didn't feel like they were naturally blended but rather props. (I guess Inara serves tea
in some scenes?) But one thing in particular I can't stand now, is the use of Mandarin.

So as fans know, the creators of the show (i.e. Joss Whedon) used Mandarin in order to
get past the network censorship rules by replacing curse words with random Mandarin
words. The only problem is: no one actually speaks Mandarin. My wife is a fluent speaker
from Taiwan, and their pronunciation is so bad, she couldn't even identify the language
until I explained it to her. It's almost as if the actors simply read the pinyin in the
script without learning how to actually pronounce pinyin. That level of negligence
starts to feel almost as bad as when creators would use the very racist, "ching, chang,
chong," in place of Mandarin dialogue. It's not only lazy, but it shows a huge level of
disrespect by the creators to not even put in the bare minimum effort to translate
beyond typing words into Google translate.

Walk through the confusion with me. I know the creators had a tight budget, but why
didn't 1% of it go towards something more than a cursory Google search? For example, if
they wanted to use Mandarin as a main language in the show, did anyone stop and think to
hire someone who actually speaks Mandarin? Maybe that person could've helped actors
pronounce pinyin correctly. Why even call it Chinese? The characters clearly think
they're speaking Mandarin. What if the creators just called it a futuristic mix of
chinese-english slang? Then, to sell it to the audience, they could've cast a fluent
Mandarin speaker as Simon's and River's dad. That alone could have sold, and fit even
better with the idea that they're using it only when trying to curse or add emphasis.
As it stands, the only thing Asian about Simon's dad is that he wanted Simon to become
a doctor.

As far as I can tell, the reason the creators didn't do any of that is because it
would've taken actual effort. As much as I loved Firefly in the past, I find it harder
to overlook these small issues now. I still feel 95% of the show is done perfectly. It's
only that 5% where the creators tried to take things from Asian cultures without taking
any of the responsibility for showing it properly is just awful. And it's this 5% that
separates great works from just good works. Great works get the 5% details right. Great
works might make mistakes, but at least there's a distinct feeling that the creators
tried hard to get the small things right. And that's not what I'm seeing with Firefly
anymore. That 5% they could've done correctly, there's just no feeling that anyone
involved in the creative process tried at all to get it right.

I'm sure there's lots of people you can blame on the creative staff, and we shouldn't
focus all our blame on one or two individuals, but rather a system that allows these
kinds of mistakes to routinely occur in the first place. But it's hard not to give some
of the blame to the person leading the production: Joss Whedon. He could've done more.
He talked a big game about how important Asian culture was for influencing the setting
in Firefly. But in reality, he just liked the way some Asian things looked and not for
what they are. It seems like Whedon cared more about sounding cool than putting in the
work. And that is what knocked Firefly off the pedestal of a great work. At least for
me.