---
layout: single
title:  "Was Grad School Worth It?"
date:   2022-02-15 23:00:00 -0800
tags: school phd
categories: life
---

I often wonder if grad school was worth it (3 years experimental physics, 5 years
computational physics). The question has no meaning now that I've met many different
people in the working world and how so many of them didn't need to get a PhD to get to
the same place I am at now. So what did the PhD give me really?

I try to focus on the positives first. I often complained about the workload and the
sheer amount of time it takes to do research. But all that training came with
one huge perk: nothing I've encountered in the last 3 years of working in industry has
been as challenging as my PhD. Turns out discovering something new is really hard. And
if a person can figure out how to do that, they can surely figure out how to apply
things that have already been discovered. And it's not just about the raw challenge of research.
It's also about the opportunity to wear many hats and the many different tools of the trade. For example, I actually learned how to create websites and did so for every group I was in. I learned to
work with melting and forming glass as part of experimental physics. And I am a completely self-taught Python programmer. And because research is always on something someone has not
done before, new tools have to constantly be developed and created by none other than graduate
students. So I had to got really good at learning new things on my own and quickly
hacking solutions together. That experience proved invaluable as it taught me how to distill out the most crucial components with the minimum amount of effort to get a prototype working.

And the PhD environment itself is probably one of the best environments I've been in.
While there are many horror stories of professor run amok, looking back, I really miss
the large international community of researchers all brought together because of their
love of a particular field. It was very invigorating to be working with so many
different people, people who were all brought together because of their great love of
science. And on top of that, every one of them was as dedicated to the cause as I was.
It was nice to know that no matter what crazy new thing we had to do to finish our
project, everyone was willing to work and never quit. That is one thing I think is very
rare to experience outside of academia.

But also, I've met many people with the same level of skill and training I have without
needing to go through a PhD. But, one commonality is that everyone who is that good had
to go through a similar phase of solving challenging and rapidly changing problems.
Maybe there are better ways than a PhD to get trained at that level. But at least for
me, I don't think I could be as good as I am now without going through a PhD. And the
community itself was a major draw to me and probably helped make make it through the
program without quiting. So I think that's the value of a PhD - the ability to handle
any challenge and the confidence to learn any new tools to do so.
