---
layout: single
title:  "My mom's very biased advice"
date:   2023-01-10 23:00:00 -0800
tags: asian parents
categories: life asian
excerpt: "My mom's very outdated advice on how to approach the working world."
---

Latley, I've been preoccupied with what my parents advised me. My mother
has been telling me that I need to just focus on work, show up, be super
reliable, super loyal, and I'll avoid all the layoffs. She even takes it
to the extreme of telling me to avoid taking extra vacations, or taking
advantage of sick-leave policies. That I should always be prioritizing
work, and don't make it look like I'm, in her own words, "taking
advantage of my employer".

And really, she this advice just bothers me. Not because of the bad
parts at the end. I can ignore all of that, but it still felt like bad
advice. It's because the core of advice feels like she wants to keep me
down. Granted, her advice is from her own personal experience. She
avoided many rounds of layoffs from her own working life - going from a
company of hundreds to just 50 in the end. So why does it bother me?
Because it feels like she's advising me to conform to the pereptually
busy, endlessly loyal Asian worker bee that has become such a stereotype
in this country. And by advising me to stick to that strategy, it almost
feels like she wants to keep me down. Keep me in the same position she
was relegated to her whole career.

I don't think she does it out of spite. The reality is that the world
was different 30 years ago, and significantly worse for Asian workers.
The way they'll be passed over for promotions more often, lack the
necessary qualities for leadership. Really, all of that was just a
slightly better excuse to put on paper rather than admitting that the
boss just felt like the Asian was a "bad culture fit." (Which really was
just used another cover for racism).

I don't know how to explain to my mom that things are different now. We
don't have to keep our heads down grinding away anymore. We can ask for
more. We can take on riskier projects, we can stand out. We can just do
more. I don't know if it's even possible to convince her the world is
different. Instead, I just have to accept the conflict between us. I
know the Asian in me is supposed to just nod along and obey. Asians
always demonstrate their love by obedience to the Confucian principles.
But I just can't do it. I can't just obey her, and falling into the same
traps set for my parents. And I don't know how to rectify this with my
Asian-ness. So I just have to accept this conflict will always be there.