---
layout: single
title:  "Preparing for Interviews After a PhD"
tags: coding interview
---

# Intro

My first interview after earning my PhD was an absolute disaster. I had
this naive idea that my PhD will carry me through any technical interview. Instead, my
PhD almost didn't matter. I asked all
the wrong questions and made a fool of myself. I focused on the wrong content
from my background and bored the audience. And I really had no idea how to
approach a white boarding question at all. But after going through the Insight
fellowship, spending over 2 years in industry, and being on both sides of the
tech interview - I think I figured some things out. So I wanted to write this
guide for any PhD graduates who want to leave academia and join the tech world.

What this guide won't do is go into any specifics of past interviews I've done
(for obvious legal reasons). Nor will following it guarantee success at every
interview for every person. What I hope this will do is give students a sense of
what to focus on in their own preparation, and hopefully help them find some
combination of ideas and techniques that work for them.

I'll divide this up into two sections - soft skills and hard skills. For I had no soft skills at the start of my prep but
I found it to be easy to pick up. As for hard skills - I had plenty, but I just
didn't know how best to present those skills. However, I found that both are
required to succeed, and often I like soft skills more.

# Soft Skills

## Attitude

This was one of the biggest shifts I had to make - which was the attitude I had
when approaching an interview. I started off thinking that they were testing me,
and looking to catch some flaw I had so they can fail me. This mentality
convinced me that if I failed, it's because there's something wrong with me.
Either that I wasn't good enough or I said the wrong thing. Well, that's not the
right attitude and it made me look very unsure of myself.

Instead, I learned I need to approach it with a more relaxed attitude. See, I
realized people aren't looking to break a candidate. Quite to the contrary,
interviewers are looking to hire candidates quickly and are actually looking to
find reasons to hire a candidate. So learning to relax was a crucial skill to
appear more confident in these interviews which people definitely pick up on.

The interview is not a test. Rather, the interview is a check for mutual fit.
Instead of See, there's many reasons why a candidate can be a bad fit and
nothing would be wrong with the candidate. For example, most companies will look
for someone who is enthusiastic about their job. But what does that mean? To me,
I always looked for what the candidate is enthusiastic about the most. For
example, it could be the company wants someone who is super detailed and wants
to be really picky about reviewing code. Or the company wants someone to write
about the subject with a lot of passion as part of their job. Those are
radically different kings of people who would gravitate to either task. While I
have no doubt most people can learn either of those jobs, the question is, why
would they? Fit isn't about a person being bad. Skill isn't a linear skill, and
neither is job preference. So if candidate A doesn't prefer writing blogs, and
candidate B does, that doesn't mean that I think candidate A can't write blogs.
It just means that I think candidate B might approach that part of the job with
more enthusiasm.

So as a first exercise - think about what you really want to do in your next
job. What are you really enthusiastic about? Use that as a nucleus for preparing
every line of your resume, and answer to interview questions. Enthusiasm is
contagious, so if a candidate came appeared really enthusiastic about the things
I want them to be enthusiastic about, that almost completely trumps a skill or
experience difference between competing candidates.

##

# Hard Skills